Biomedical Science and Engineering, 2015, Vol. 3, No. 2, 41-45
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/bse/3/2/3

O Science and Education Publishing

DOI:10.12691/bse-3-2-3

+ SeltP
vw) Science & Education
Publishing

 

AT1 Receptor Antagonists: Pharmacological Treatment

of Hypertension in Brazil

Vanessa Pepeliascov!, Kleber de Magalhães Galvão!, Dones Cláudio Janz Jr”, Helen Dutra Leite”,
Felipe de Lara Janz””

"Bandeirante University, Sao Paulo, Brazil
2Ponta Grossa StateUniversity, Ponta Grossa Brazil
*Universityof São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
*Corresponding author: fljanzDusp.br

Abstract High blood pressure (HBP) is a multifactorial disease that affects millions of people around the world
and contributes to a large number of deaths due to acute myocardial infarction, stroke and chronic kidney disease. Its
etiology remains inconclusive, but it is known that it arises of central and peripheral catecholaminergic dysfunction.
Thus, cellular mechanisms are still under investigation. Its pathophysiology is characterized by an increase in
systolic and diastolic blood pressure levels. The national and international guidelines for hypertension indicate that
effective pharmacotherapy provides a control in blood pressure values and mortality/ morbidityreduction. Classes of
antihypertensive drugs available for clinical use are diuretics, beta-blockers, alpha-blockers, sympatholytic, calcium
channel antagonists, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor antagonists of angiotensin II
(ARBs). ARBs (i.e.: candesartan, irbesartan, losartan, olmesartan, telmisartan and valsartan)represent current and
often used drug class in Brazil.They have different molecular configurations with independent action mechanismsin
angiotensin II AT1 receptor. The objective of this paper is to discuss the pathophysiology and pharmacotherapy of
hypertension, emphasizing the antagonists of angiotensin II used in Brazil, since they constitute a class of
antihypertensive drugs that has fewer side effects and greater therapeutic efficacy.

Keywords: high blood pressure, pharmacotherapy, angiotensin II antagonists

Cite This Article: Vanessa Pepeliascov, Kleber de Magalhães Galvão, Dones Cláudio Janz Jr, Helen Dutra
Leite, and Felipe de Lara Janz, “AT1 Receptor Antagonists: Pharmacological Treatment of Hypertension in

Brazil.” Biomedical Science and Engineering, vol. 3, no. 2 (2015): 41-43. doi: 10.12691/bse-3-2-3.

1. Introduction

1.1. Blood Pressure and Control Mechanisms

Peripheral vascular resistance (PVR) and cardiac output
(CO) determine blood pressure (BP). Control of BP
involves numerous substances and physiological
mechanisms that interact to maintain the PA at appropriate
levels in different situations. Control mechanisms result
from the interaction of various physiological systems as
cardiovascular, renal, neural and endocrine systems. The
autonomic nervous system and its different hormonal
types stand out in controlling blood pressure [1].
Dysfunctions in these control mechanisms, with
consequent changes in the variables PVR and DC result in
systemic hypertension (SH) [2]. Autonomic nervous
system (ANS) plays an important role in controlling blood
pressure.

According to the VI Brazilian Guidelines on Arterial
Hypertension (2010) in 2007, there were 1,157,509 cases
for cardiovascular disease (CVD) in the National Health
System. With regard to costs, in November 2009 there
were 91,970 hospitalizations for CVD, resulting in a cost
of R$ 165,461,644.33. End-stage renal disease, another
condition often associated to hypertension, resulted in the

inclusion of 94 282 individuals undergoing dialysis in
SUS(Health UnicSystem and 9,486 deaths in 2007.

We can classify this regulation in two ways: short-
termneuro-humoral regulation and medium and long-term
regulation through the activation or inhibition of hormone
systems or for retention and excretion of sodium [3]. ANS
influences tonic and reflex cardiovascular system. Largely
the effects caused by the nervous system in the
cardiovascular system are due tothe action of
neurotransmitters noradrenaline (NA) and acetylcholine
(Ach). However, catecholamines release in other
postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic terminals
potentiate or decrease the activity of NA and Ach [4].
According to Guyton and Hall, 2002, [5] there are reflex
mechanisms from the autonomic nervous system, that
control the BP, the main ones are the baroreceptors,
arterial chemoreceptors and lung receptors.

The blood pressure control by the baroreflex system
(mediated by stimulation of baroreceptors aortic and
carotid, called high-pressure receptors) acts in situations
where it is required to keep track of blood pressure, such
as physical exercise, postural changes or pathological
situations like hemorrhage and hypothermia [6]. Arterial
chemoreceptors are sensitive cells that monitor the amount
of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen ions in the blood.
When BP falls below a critical level, chemoreceptors are


Biomedical Science and Engineering 42

stimulated by decreasing oxygen, carbon dioxide
formation and hydrogen ions [7].

Baroreceptors are located in strategic positions between
the heart and the brain, and chemoreceptors are located in
the carotid bodies of two common carotid arteries and
aortic bodies of the aorta [8]. Release of adrenaline and
noradrenaline from the adrenal medulla, release of
vasopressin by the neurohypophysis and the increase in
plasma renin levels occur when sustained BP falls. These
humoral mechanisms may performa cardiovascular
response for minutes or even hours [6].

1.1.1. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone

Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) has
been studied for over a century and found to play an
important role in blood pressure regulation. This system
helps to maintain cardiovascular homeostasis, control of
volume and peripheral vascular resistance. Misfits in this
system are directly involved in the onset of hypertension
[9].

Activation of this system is given by prorenin, which is
secreted in juxtaglomerular cells located in nephrons in
response to an increase in sympathetic nervous system
activity or a decrease in blood pressure, the volume of
extracellular fluids and the extracellular sodium
concentration [10]. Prorenin is then converted to renin.
Three predominant mechanisms control the secretion of
renin, which are macula dense, renal baroreceptor and
sympathetic stimulation [9]. In the bloodstream, renin acts
enzymatically in the conversion of angiotensinogen,
which is a plasma protein produced in the liver and has
452 amino acids. Angiotensinogen is converted to
angiotensin I, which is then converted to angiotensin. This
conversion occurs in the passage of blood through the
lungs through angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE).
ACE is composed of 1278 amino acids consisting of two
domains: one amino terminal and one carboxyterminal. It
is most frequently found on the luminal surface of
vascular endothelial cells, also found in smooth muscle
cells of the vessels, cardiomyocytes, proximal convoluted
tubule kidney and brain tissue. Recently identified a
homologue of ACE, ACE2 that critically regulates heart
function, and provides a counteraction to the ACE [11].

There are 02 types of angiotensin II receptors, AT1 and
AT2.The main actions of angiotensin II (ANG II) are
mediated by these two receptors, especially in the control
of blood pressure. Angiotensin II receptor blockers are
highly selective to AT1 receptor. They act antagonistically,
blocking the actions of ANG Il. The AT1 receptor
blockade results in inhibition of vasoconstriction and
decreased aldosterone synthesis [12]. ANG II is a potent
vasoconstrictor that acts on the short and long-term
regulation of blood pressure. ANG II present in circulation
reduces the excretion of sodium by increasing the
absorption thereof in the proximal tubules of the kidney.
The stimulation of aldosterone secretion by the adrenal
gland that is responsible for increasing the retention of salt
and water by the kidneys is mediated by ANG II, thus
contributing to AP long-term regulation [13].

The AT1 and AT2 receptors membrane mediates the
biological activity of ANG II. AT1 receptor promotes
most of the known actions of ANG II effects such as
vasodilation, inhibition of apoptosis and cell growth and
differentiation, through the intermediate pathways involving

substances such as diacylglycerol, inositol triphosphate,
phospholipase C and calcium. AT2 receptors have a
probable action in modulating the effects of angiotensin II
to the AT1 receptor [10].

2.  Pharmacotherapy of
Hypertension

Systemic

According to the Brazilian Hypertension Guidelines of
2010, the goals of pharmacological treatment of
hypertension should be: reduction of morbidity and
mortality in cardiovascular events and achievement of the
goals set in pressure levels. Below is the classification of
drugs for the treatment of hypertension:

a) Diuretics;

b) Centrally acting adrenergic inhibitors - alpha-2 central
agonists;

c) Beta-blockers;

d) Alpha-blockers - alpha-1 adrenergic blockers;

e) Direct vasodilators;

f) Calcium channel blockers;

g) Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors;

h) AT1 receptor blockers of angiotensin II;

i) Direct renin inhibitor.

Studies have demonstrated reduction of morbidity and
mortality in greater numbers with diuretics, beta-blockers,
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors of angiotensin
AT1 receptor blockers and calcium channel blockers.
Among the therapeutic classes mentioned, the ATI
receptor blockers have shown greater efficacy in reducing
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (Ribeiro, 2008).
The LIFE study (Losartan Intervention for The End Point
Reduction in Hypertension Study), VALUE (Valsartan
Antihypertensive Long-term Use Evaluation) and SCOPE
(Study on Cognition in the Elderly) show comparable
values in the reduction in blood pressure compared with
the effects and classes cardio protective that provide better
results than other therapies [11].

2.1. Antagonists of Angiotensin II Receptor

The arrival of antagonists of angiotensin II receptor in
the pharmaceutical market is relatively recent. It began in
the late 1980swith losartan and currently has several other
representatives who appeared in the pharmaceutical
market a few years ago. In Brazil, the marketed drugs are
candesartan, irbesartan, losartan, olmesartan, telmisartan
and valsartan.

 

Table 1. Angiotensin type II receptor blockers

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Candesartan 8 mg and 32 mg
Irbersartan 150 mg and 300 mg
losartan 25 mg 100 mg
Olmesartan 20 mg and 40 mg
Telmisartan 40 mg and 160 mg
Valsartan 80 mgand 320 mg

 

This antihypertensive drug class is relatively new, but
has shown to reduce cardiovascular events related to
hypertension. The first drug of this class was losartan. In
Brazil, there are six types of angiotensin II receptor
blockers (ARBs): losartan, valsartan, candesartan,
telmisartan, olmesartan and ibersartan. LIFE, VALUE and

 


43 Biomedical Science and Engineering

SCOPE studies were conducted with hypertensive patients
to verify the effectiveness of these ARBs. The LIFE study
compared ARBs with atenolol and losartan; their results
showed that losartan achieved a blood pressure reduction
of 30.2 / 16.6 while atenololprovided a reduction of
29.1/16.8 mm/hg. The most significant values
wereobtained in the reduction of cardiovascular events,
with 25% reduction of cerebral vascular accident (CVA)
and onset of diabetes, with treatment with losartan [14].
Beneficial effects of ARBs are primarily attributed to
its ability to block specificallythe AT1 angiotensin II
receptors, preventing its harmful effects. They have
different molecular configurations that promote actions

regardless ofthe form of block angiotensin II AT1 receptor.

Among them, olmesartan is the one that has demonstrated
greater reduction in blood pressure values. Olmesartan
medoxomil is the newest drug of the class of AT1 receptor
blockers of angiotensin II (ARBs). In comparative studies,
it was effective in reducing blood pressure values higher
than others in this class and similar to amiodipine [12].
ARBs, in general, act by blocking the action of the AT1
receptor, which is responsible for most actions hitherto
known angiotensin II. Through the intermediate pathways
involving substances such as diacylglycerol (DAG),
inositol triphosphate (PI3), phospholipase C (PLC) and
calcium, Angiotensin II also stimulates vasoconstriction
promotes intracellular protein synthesis [10].

The roles of AT2 receptors are not well defined. They
play a role of importance in fetuses and in adults in
response to injury. It is believed that the AT2 receptor is
involved in modulating the effects of angiotensin II to the
AT1 receptor (counteracting the pro-synthesis stimulus)
[9]. The antihypertensive effect of ARBs is comparable to
other antihypertensive agents such as ACE inhibitors,
calcium antagonists and beta-blockers. Irbesartan
(300mg/day), candesartan (16 mg/day) appear to have
antihypertensive effect more pronounced than losartan
(100 mg / day to 50 mg/day, respectively) in patients with
essential hypertension [12]. ARBs result in an equal
pressure drop that is indifferent to increasing the dose.
This is a dose-response “shallow” curve when it comes to
olmesartan, however, the curve has a steeper slope.
Studies with olmesartan demonstrate that this molecule
has the greatest number of functional sites (seven), and the
hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions provided
by the hydroxyl radicals and alpha-carboxyl increase
affinity for the AT1 receptor [15].

2.1.1. Pharmacodynamics

Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are a class of
antihypertensive drugs that block the RAAS, selectively
antagonizing the ANG II receptor type AT1. ARBs can
operate in dual manner, namely blocking the actions of
ANG II by the antagonism of AT1 receptors and AT2
receptors stimulating by elevated circulating levels of
ANG II [15]. The pharmacologically ARBs, have

pharmacodynamics differences in the mechanism of action.

However, generally the blockade of AT1 receptors,
antagonizing the effects of Ang II, [13].

The basic mechanism of action of angiotensin II
antagonists is to antagonize specifically the AT1 receptor,
emptyingthe AT2 receptor. Angiotensin II antagonists
have a different pharmacodynamics profile from ACE
inhibitors; they do not block the converting enzyme and,

thus, do not increase levels of bradykinin [8]. As stated
within the ARBs classes there pharmacodynamics
differences as we see below: Losartan binds selectively to
the AT1 receptor and does not bind to or block other
hormone receptors or ion channels that are important in
cardiovascular regulation. Losartan is a potent orally
active synthetic compound.Both in vitro and in vivo,
losartan as a pharmacologically active metabolite
carboxylic acid (E-3174) block all physiologically
relevant actions of angiotensin II, regardless of the source
or route of synthesis [16].

Candesartan cilexetil has a different mechanism of
action when compared to losartan;the prodrug is rapidly
converted to the active drug, candesartan, by ester
hydrolysis during absorption in the gastrointestinal tract.
Candesartan is an antagonist of angiotensin II receptor,
selective for AT1 receptors, with tight binding to it and
slow dissociation from the receptor. Candesartan does not
bind to or block other hormone receptors or ion channels
known to be important in cardiovascular regulation [17].

Olmesartan medoxomil is a prodrug as well as
candesartan. During absorption from the gastrointestinal
tract, it is hydrolyzed to olmesartan, the biologically active
compound. It is a selective antagonist of angiotensin II
receptor subtype AT1. Olmesartan binds competitively
and selectively to the AT1 receptor, preventing the
vasoconstrictor effects of ANG II selectively blocking its
binding to the AT1 receptor in vascular smooth muscle.
Its action does not depend on the route of synthesis of
ANG [18].

Telmisartan removes, with very high  affinity,
angiotensin II from its binding sites at the AT1 receptor,
which is responsible for the known actions of angiotensin
II. Telmisartan has no partial agonist activity at the AT1
receptor selectively and binds to these receptors. This
connection is long lasting. Telmisartan does not show
affinity for other receptors, including AT2 [19]. Valsartan
is a potent and specific antagonist of Ang II receptor
active orally. It acts selectively on the AT1 receptor
subtype. Increased plasma levels of Ang II according to
the AT1 receptor blockade with valsartan may stimulate
the unblocked AT2 receptor, which appears to
counterbalance the effect of the AT1 receptor [20].

2.1.2. Pharmacokinetics

ARBs have low oral bioavailability, usually lower than
50%, except for irbesartan (70%) and high plasma protein
binding (> 90%). Most ARBs are metabolized by the liver
and therefore should be used with caution in patients with
impaired liver function, especially for telmisartan. Age,
ethnicity and sex do not seem to interfere with the efficacy
of these drugs [21].

Oral losartan is well absorbed and undergoes first-pass
metabolism, forming an active carboxylic acid metabolite
and other inactive metabolites. Presents a systemic
bioavailability of approximately 33%, achieving its mean
maximum concentration, of its active metabolite in 1 hour
and in 3 to 4 hours, respectively.Losartan and its active
metabolite present the plasma protein binding rate> 99%,
mainly to albumin. The volume of distribution of losartan
is 34 liters. Studies in rats indicate that losartan does not
substantially cross the blood-brain barrier. After oral
administration, plasma concentrations of losartan and its
active metabolite exponentially decrease with terminal


Biomedical Science and Engineering 44

half-life of approximately 2 hours and 6 to 9 hours,
respectively. During the administration of a single daily
dose of 100 mg losartan and its active metabolite do not
accumulate in plasma. Biliary and urinary excretion
contribute to the elimination of losartan and its
metabolites [22].

Olmesartan medoxomil is described chemically as two,
3-diidroxi-2-butenil-4-(1-hidroxi-1-metiletil)-2-propil-1-
[p-(o-1H-tetrazol-5fenil) benzil] imidazol-5-carboxilato, 2,
3-cycliccarbonate. The empirical formula is C29H30N606.
Its bioactivation by ester hydrolysis occurs to olmesartan
during absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. Appears
to be eliminated in a biphasic fashion, with a half-life of 6-
15 hours. Pharmacokinetics of olmesartan is linear
following single oral doses and multiple oral doses higher
than therapeutic doses. Olmesartan binds competitively
and selectively to the AT1 receptor, the action is
independent of the synthesis pathways of angiotensin II
[23]. The absolute bioavailability is of approximately 26%.
The maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) after oral
administration is reached after approximately 2 hours.
Approximately 30% to 50% of the absorbed dose is
recovered in the urine, while feces excrete the remainder.

The prodrug candesartan cilexetil is converted to the
active drug candesartan. The absolute bioavailability of
candesartan is about 40% after an oral solution of
candesartan cilexetil. The relative bioavailability of
candesartan cilexetil tablets, compared with the same oral
solution is approximately 34%, with very little variability.
The mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) occurs 3-4
hours after ingestion of the tablet. Candesartan is highly
bound to plasma proteins (> 99%). Candesartan is
eliminated primarily unchanged by urinary tract and bile
and only a small part is eliminated by hepatic metabolism
24].

Telmisartan possesses rapid absorption, but the amount
absorbed varies. The mean absolute bioavailability is
about 50%. Telmisartan predominantly binds to plasma
proteins (99.5%), mainly albumin and alpha-l acid
glycoprotein. The metabolism takes place by conjugation
to glucuronide. Telmisartan is characterized by a bi-
exponential decay kinetics with a terminal half-life greater
than 20 hours. Cumulative urinary excretion is less than
2% of the dose.

Valsartan after oral administration exhibits a mean
absolute bioavailability of 23%. Valsartan has an
exponential decay kinetics (t1/2 alpha <1 h and t 1/2 beta
about 9 am). The pharmacokinetics of valsartan is linear in
the tested dose range. No changes occur in the kinetics of
valsartan on repeated administration and there is little
accumulation when administered once daily. The binding
rate to serum proteins (94-97%), mainly serum albumin.
Of the total absorbed dose, 70% are excreted in feces and
30% in the urine, mainly as unchanged drug [24].

3. Conclusion

Based on the literature review we concluded that
hypertension is a disease that affects a significant portion
of the world population. In the literature there is no
consensus regarding the etiology of hypertension. Thus,
the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in the
pathophysiology remain under investigation. However, it

is known that there is a central and peripheral
catecholamine dysfunction in arterial hypertension.
Scientists are still searching for a drug therapy that is
effective in the treatment of hypertension, as well as
providing obtaining the control target, a reduction in
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Currently, there
are several classes of drugs for hypertension that present
varying mechanisms of action. Among these classes of
drugs, the AT1 receptor blockers angiotensin I, have
proven to be effective in treating this pathology by
reducing the rates of cardiovascular mortality and
morbidity. ARBs have among themselves in different
ways AT1 receptor blocking action, due to its molecular
differences. Olmesartan medoxomil is the newest drug of
this class andprovides greater reduction in blood pressure.
The side effects of ARBs are comparable to placebo. Thus,
there is a greater patient compliance to treatment and a
positive response in the treatment of hypertension.

(1,80nM)

Telmisartana

(6)

(0,09nM)

 

Candesartana

 

 

 

Figure 1. Molecular structure of main antagonists of the angiotensin Ilin
Brazil

References

1 Cesaretti, Mario Luis Riberio; Ginoza, Milton; Kohimann Junior,
Osvaldo. Neural mechanisms: sympathetic nervous system. In:
Ribeiro, Artur Beltrame; Plavnik, Frida Liane. Update on clinical
hypertension, diagnostic and therapeutic: Pathophysiology of
hypertension. London: Atheneu, 2008. Chapter 9, p. 79-85.

2 Krieger, Eduardo Moacyr; Irigoyen, Maria Claudia; Krieger, José
Eduardo. Pathophysiology of hypertension. Journal of
Cardiolologia Society of the State of São Paulo, São Paulo, P.01-7,
1999.

3 Ribeiro, José Márcio; Florencio Leonardo P.Pharmacological
blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system: converting
enzyme inhibition and AT1 receptor antagonism. Brazilian Journal
of Hypertension, Sao Paulo, n., P.293-302, 2000.

4] PR Vade Mecum. Vade Mecum medications.
publications ed. São Paulo, 2011.

5 Rang, H.P; Dale, M.M, Pharmacology, 3rd ed. Publisher Koogan
Guanabara, Rio de Janeiro, 1997.

6] Guyton, AC, HallL, JE Treaty of Medical Physiology 10. Ed. Rio
de Janeiro Guanabara Koogan 2002.

7 Cipullo, José Paulo et al. Prevalence and Risk Factors for
Hypertension in a Brazilian Population Urbana. Brazilian
Archives of Cardiology, Sao Paulo, P.520-526, 2010.

8] Franklin, Stanley S. et al. Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
in Hypertensive Patients with Lower Risk Higher Versus LIFE
Substudy. American Heart Association, Dallas, p.492-499, 2005.

RGR 17

 

 


45

9]

10

11

12

13

14

15

 

16

 

Biomedical Science and Engineering

Gomes, Marco Antonio Mota et al. Treatment of Hypertension
with olmesartan medoxomil in scheduling. Brazilian Archives of
Cardiology, Sao Paulo, p.185-193, 2008.

Kreutz, R. Olmesartan / amlodipine: A review of its use in the
management of hypertension. Vascular Health andRisk
Management, Princeton, p. 183-192. 2011.

Lopes, Heno Ferreira; GIL, Juliana Dos Santos; Consolim-
Colombo, Fernanda Marciano. Activation of the adrenergic system,
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone, endothelin and adrenomedullin in
hypertension. Journal of the Society of Cardiology of the State of
São Paulo, São Paulo, v. 18, no. 2, p.102-107, 2008.

Mion Jr, Decius et al. The importance of antihypertensive
medication treatment adherence. Brazilian Journal of
Hypertension, Rio de Janeiro, p.55-58, 2006.

Neves, Francis ofAssisi; Campos, Alessandra Menezes. Renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone In: Ribeiro, Arthur Beltrame; Plavnik,
Frida Liane Update on clinical hypertension, diagnosis and
treatment. London: Atheneu, 2008.

Oigman, Wille; Fritsche, Mario Toros. Drugs that intervene in the
renin-angiotensin system. Brazilian Journal of Hypertension, Rio
de Janeiro, v.5, p.84-90, 1998.

Oparil, Suzanne et al. Comparative efficacy of olmesartan,
losartan, valsartan and irbesartan in the control of primary
hypertension. The jornaul of Clinical Hypertension, vol. 3, no. 5, p.
202-282, 2001.

Tamargo, Juan et al. Pharmacological characteristics of ARB them.
Son all iguales? Spanish Journal of Cardiology, vol. 6, p 10-24,
2006.

 

17

20

21

22

23

24

25

 

Trapp, Silvia Manduca, Vailatil, Maria do Carmo Fernandes,
Matsubara, Beatriz Bojikian, Schwartz, Denise Saretta. Effects of
angiotensin Il in the cardiovascular system. Archives of
Veterinary Science, North America, 14, jun. 2009.

Verdecchia, Paolo et al. Comparative assessment of angiotensin
receptor blockers in different clinical settings. Vascular Health and
Risk Management, Princeton, n., P.939-949, November 2008.
Rigatto, Katya Vianna, Bohlke, Maristela, Irigoyen, Maria Claudia.
Renin angiotensin system: from physiology to therapy. Magazine
Society of Cardiology of Rio Grande do Sul. 2004.

Salgado, Wilson. Control of blood pressure to prevent
cardiovascular disease. In: Santos, Raul D. Manual of prevention
of cardiovascular diseases. London: Atha, 2008.

Povoa, Rui; Bombig, Maria Teresa Nogueira. Hypertension
secondarily renal and endocrine origin: diagnosis and treatment.
Journal of Cardiolologia Society of the State of São Paulo, São
Paulo, n., P.122-134, 2008.

Consolim-Colombo, Fernanda M; Krieger, Eduardo Moacyr.
Sympathetic nervous system and hypertension. Brazilian
Hypertension magazine, Rio de Janeiro, v 11, p. 275-278, 2004.
Correa, Thiago Domingos et al. Hypertension: an update on the
epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Medical files Abc, Sao
Paulo, n. 5, P.90-101, 2006.

Brazilian Guidelines on Hypertension, Brazilian Archives of
Cardiology, vol. 95, 2010.

BRASIL. Ministério da Saúde. Cadernos de Atenção Básica:
Hipertensão Arterial Sistêmica. n. 15. Brasília, 2006.Link:
http://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/caderno atencao basic
al5.pdf.